Denis Charter Rewrite (#20)
transmute-industries/ietf-spice-charter: charter.md

## Introduction

Digital credentials may be thought as digital equivalents of paper-based passports, driver's licenses, membership certificates or proofs of qualification attached to a person.
These types of credentials usually contain personal data such as a family name, first names, a gender, a birth date, an home address, a phone number, a face picture

> or minutiae points for fingerprints.

Author: Digital credentials are essential to identity, authorization, licenses, certificates and digitization use cases that are part of modernization efforts targeting efficiency, transparency, such as digital licenses or certificates of origin.

> Digital credentials may be thought as digital equivalents of paper-based passports, driver's licenses, membership certificates or proofs of qualification attached to a person.
> These types of credentials usually contain personal data such as a family name, first names, a gender, a birth date, an home address, a phone number, a face picture
> or minutiae points for fingerprints.

Author: ```suggestion
Digital credentials are essential to identity, authorization, licenses, certificates and digitization use cases that are part of modernization efforts targeting efficiency, transparency, such as digital licenses or certificates of origin.
```

Author: I don't support framing the work as "for natural persons only", I would like to revert this set of changes to what we had previously.

Reviewer: I concur that natural persons frames this narrowly in a way I do not think is productive for the charter and this group at this juncture. Given this perspective, I only prefer the proposed change by Orie in the counter-edit in green.

Reviewer 2: > I don't support framing the work as "for natural persons only", I would like to revert this set of changes to what we had previously.

However, no rational for this rejection has been provided. So I can only wonder why. 
Is there an intent to address legal persons as well ? 
If it is the case, I wonder why legal persons would have privacy concerns. 
Natural persons have privacy concerns, why would it also apply to legal persons ?
If it is not the case of legal persons, why other case(s) is it ?

Reviewer 3: Digital Credentials may be used to represent assets or organizations, not just natural persons, there should be no need to restrict it to just natural persons

Reviewer 4: Mesur is using digital credentials for many use cases where they do not represent natural persons. Restricting things in this manner is not necessary.

> In some contexts, persons may be willing either to partially disclose some values of their attributes or to demonstrate some properties about their attributes without disclosing their values.

Author: ```suggestion
In some contexts, holders may be willing either to partially disclose some values of their attributes or to demonstrate some properties about their attributes without disclosing their values.
```

Reviewer: Agree with this change.

> When received by an entity, a proof of ownership of the digital credential needs to be provided and verified, so that only the legitimate owner of the digital credential can take an advantage of its possession. The use of Trusted Applications (TAs) supported by a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) is essential in order to provide a proof of ownership of a digital credential.

Author: ```suggestion
When received by an entity, a proof of the digital credential needs to be provided and verified, so that only the legitimate controller of the digital credential can take an advantage of its possession. The use of Trusted Applications (TAs) supported by a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) is essential in order to provide a proof of control of a digital credential.
```

Reviewer: Is "use of Trusted Applications (TAs) supported by a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) is essential in order to provide a proof of control of a digital credential" essential at this juncture and explicit in the charter? I know of one or two parties are assertive on this. I do not think this is a hard requirement for the charter. Should proponents work in this WG, TEEP, and other relevant groups for *later* documents? Sure. Does this mean all architectures and related deliverables must mandate TEE out the gate? It is not 100% so in this section, but we are getting close enough. Is that the most important thing now?

Reviewer: Is "use of Trusted Applications (TAs) supported by a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) is essential in order to provide a proof of control of a digital credential" essential at this juncture to be explicit in the charter? I know of one or two parties are assertive on this in the mailing list. I do not think this is a hard requirement for the charter. Should proponents work in this potential WG, TEEP, and other relevant groups for *later* documents? Sure. Does this mean all architectures and related deliverables must mandate TEE out the gate? It is not 100% so in this section, but we are getting close enough I am not sure. Is that the most important thing now?

I would disagree to adding this, but I want to hear feedback from others to know if I am the squeaky wheel minority here.

Reviewer 5: I don't think we need this language - feels overcomplicated for the charter and too specific

Reviewer 2: The use of a TA (under a TEE) is necessary in order to prevent a collusion / collaborative attack between Alice and Bob.

As an example if Alice (12) is colluding with Bob (25), whatever cryptography is being used, it is impossible to prevent Alice to get some data from Bob demonstrating that she is over 18.

Preventing the export of the value of a private key or a secret key, does not prevent its use, at least, by the legitimate owner of these keys. At the time a credential request is initiated, the holder must demonstrate either that a private key or a link secret is stored in a TEE and originates from a given TA. 

Then after, these keys can only be used by that TA that does not allow any operation to be done with these keys, but only specific operations on already formatted data.

Without TEEs, collusion / collaborative attacks cannot be prevented.

Reviewer 4: I might be okay with "may be necessary", but I don't think this is a needed restriction.

> When received by an entity, a proof of ownership of the digital credential needs to be provided and verified, so that only the legitimate owner of the digital credential can take an advantage of its possession. The use of Trusted Applications (TAs) supported by a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) is essential in order to provide a proof of ownership of a digital credential.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When received by an entity, a proof of ownership of the digital credential needs to be provided and verified, so that only the legitimate owner of the digital credential can take an advantage of its possession. The use of Trusted Applications (TAs) supported by a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) may be essential for some use cases in order to provide a proof of ownership of a digital credential.
```

> Some persons may wish to carry more that one credential. These credentials, together with associated key material, can be stored in an identity digital wallet.

Author: ```suggestion
Some holders may wish to carry more than one credential. These credentials, together with associated key material, can be stored in a identity digital wallet.
```

## Background

W3C has introduced a 'Three Role Model' in the 'Verifiable Credentials Data Model v2.0' specification. VCDM 2.0 (https://w3c.github.io/vc-data-model)
with the following roles: a holder, an issuer and a verifier.

The wording "Verifiable Credential" (VC) is used in VCDM 2.0. It implies the use of a schema defined using JSON-LD.
The wording "Verifiable Presentation" (VP) is used in VCDM 2.0. It implies the use of data serialization using JSON-LD.

In this charter, the VC concept is captured using the wording "digital credential", while the VP concept is captured using the wording "digital presentation".

Some sets of claim names have been defined by the IANA and originate both from the IETF and the OIDF.

> The W3C has taken a different approach allowing to define any kind of claim names by referencing URNs using LD-JSON schemas that include the @context property.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: This is not an accurate statement, and I am not sure we need to repeat what other working groups outside of IETF are doing, beyond what you have said above.

Reviewer: I agree. Once we are talking about JSON-LD properties in the charter it is odd to me why we get this deep in the weeds (I am newer to IETF, but the other charters I have reviewed thus far do not).

Reviewer 5: I don't think getting into this level of detail is helpful

IETF and IRTF working groups have developed foundational building blocks with BBS Signatures, RSA Blind Signatures, Verifiable Random Functions,
or other Selective-Disclosure and collection limitation techniques.

## Key Design Properties of Digital Credentials

> - Request and issuance of digital credentials
> - Request and renewal of digital credentials
> - Revocation request and checking of the revocation state of a digital credential
> - Unlinkability of digital presentations (preventing tracking between verifiers while proving attributes / capabilities)
> - Selective Disclosure of claims (supporting collection limitation and attribute redaction)
> - Zero Knowledge Proofs (demonstrating some properties about some attributes without disclosing their values)
> - Proof of ownership of a digital presentation (using a TA running in a TEE)
> - Detection or prevention of holders collaborative attacks
> - Authenticity (ensuring that the issuer of a digital credential can be either individually authenticated or authenticated as a member of a set of trusted issuers)

Author: ```suggestion
- Unlinkability (preventing tracking while proving attributes / capabilities)
- Selective Disclosure (supporting user agency, data minimization, redaction)
- Authenticity (ensuring information is trustworthy and can be authenticated)
- Confidentiality (ensuring information is protected from unauthorized access)
- Hardware Assurance (awareness of the security capabilities of issuers, holders and verifiers)
- Availability (efficiently information processing, minimizing data in flight, reducing carbon cost for storage and transmission, and supporting offline / paper credential use cases)
- Semantic interchangeability (ensuring terms are understood and used consistently, in a global or local context)
- Usability and Feasibility (the core operations must be easy to understand and use, and possible to integrate with existing platforms)
- Accountability (what format and protocol considerations can help mitigate abusive or excessive requests for credential presentation?  What mitigates abuse by issuers?)
```

Author: I prefer the framing we have had for this section previously.

Reviewer: I agree with this change.

Reviewer 5: Agreed - let's keep the original framing

Reviewer 2: The additions make clear the topics that will need to be addressed

- Integrity (ensuring tampering with information is always evident)
- Semantic interchangeability (ensuring terms are understood and used consistently, in a global or local context)

> - Usability (the core operations must be easy to understand and use)

Author: good addition

## Goals

Coordination with CFRG, RATS, OAuth, JOSE, COSE, and SCITT are important to ensure that the latest work at IETF is leveraged.

> Feedback from experts in other IETF working groups is gathered in the SPICE WG without creating fragments of credential work s
> pread across several existing places in the IETF. Additionally, the SPICE WG will coordinate with other SDOs, such as ISO or W3C,
> on data model elements or protocols needed to support existing credential use cases.

Author: ```suggestion
Feedback from experts in other IETF working groups is gathered in the SPICE WG without creating fragments of credential work spread across several existing places in the IETF. Additionally, the SPICE WG will coordinate with other SDOs, such as ISO or W3C, on data model elements or protocols needed to support existing credential use cases.
```

Author: just fixing formatting

## In-Scope

> The SPICE WG will develop a framework in support of the 'Three Role Model', considering in particular selective disclosure of attributes
> and unlinkability between verifiers. It will consider the use of TEEs (Trusted Execution Environments) for managing key material and digital credentials.

Author: ```suggestion
The SPICE WG will develop a framework in support of the 'Three Role Model', considering in particular selective disclosure of attributes and unlinkability between verifiers. It will consider the use of TEEs (Trusted Execution Environments) for managing key material and digital credentials.
```

Author: Just formatting

The intent is to apply lessons learned from the development of W3C's 'Securing Verifiable Credentials using JOSE and COSE' specification
(https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-jose-cose), and extend them to non JSON-LD based payloads, specifically JOSE or other CBOR data structures.

A short list of lessons learned:

1. Expressive data models, such as RDF, are not necessarily suitable for all use-cases outside W3C
1. Reusing existing semantics that fit the domain well, such as provided by the IANA registry, provide can improve interoperability, significantly
1. Focussing on crisp technical specifications and producing separate informative guidance documents helps to keep technical interested parties involved
1. Compact encoding matters and aligning JSON and CBOR may provide the basis for simpler interoperability and smaller specification

## Out-of-Scope

> The working group will NOT address specific credential use cases, such as "software supply chain".

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: This change is critical for my approval of this charter rewrite.

Reviewer 2: Removing that sentence completely would be an easy way to solve the concern.

Retaining semantic interchangeability is not in-scope.

## Deliverables

Documents produced by the working group will include the following:

- An architecture document that defines the terminology (e.g., Issuer, Holder, and Verifier), the communication patterns between these parties, and the security/privacy properties.

> - A meta-data discovery document enabling holders and verifiers to discover supported protocols and formats for keys, claims, credentials and proofs.

Author: ```suggestion
- A meta-data discovery document enabling the 3 roles (issuers, holders and verifiers) to discover supported protocols and formats for keys, claims, credentials and proofs.
```

Author: You can't omit issuers here, or its impossible for a verifier to check a proof.

Reviewer 4: I think I understand what Denis is getting at, which is that Verifiers and Holder will need to discover metadata, but he is asserting that an Issuer will not. He may be correct, but it feels like an unnecessary limitation.
E.g., what if the issuer is a website and the browser is serving as the Holder wallet? It may be the most efficient protocol for the Issuer to discover metadata about the Holder's capabilities rather than the other way around.

- A document specifying the selective disclosure of claims in a secure and privacy-friendly manner.

> Milestones

Author: ```suggestion
## Milestones
```

Author: formatting

- 10 2024 - Submit an informational Architecture document to the IESG for publication
- 02 2025 - Submit a document as a proposed standard covering Metadata Discovery to the IESG for publication

> - 02 2025 - Submit a document as a proposed standard covering Selective Disclosure of Claims to the IESG for publication

Author: I am fine with this.

## In-Scope

The SPICE WG will develop a framework in support of the 'Three Role Model', considering in particular selective disclosure of attributes and unlinkability between verifiers. It will consider the use of TEEs (Trusted Execution Environments) for managing key material and digital credentials.

The intent is to apply lessons learned from the development of W3C's 'Securing Verifiable Credentials using JOSE and COSE' specification
(https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-jose-cose), and extend them to non JSON-LD based payloads, specifically JOSE or other CBOR data structures.

A short list of lessons learned:

1. Expressive data models, such as RDF, are not necessarily suitable for all use-cases outside W3C
1. Reusing existing semantics that fit the domain well, such as provided by the IANA registry, provide can improve interoperability, significantly
1. Focussing on crisp technical specifications and producing separate informative guidance documents helps to keep technical interested parties involved
1. Compact encoding matters and aligning JSON and CBOR may provide the basis for simpler interoperability and smaller specification

> ## Out-of-Scope
> 
> Retaining semantic interchangeability is not in-scope.

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Introduction

Digital credentials are essential to identity, authorization, licenses, certificates and digitization use cases that are part of modernization efforts targeting efficiency, transparency, such as digital licenses or certificates of origin.

In some contexts, holders may be willing either to partially disclose some values of their attributes or to demonstrate some properties about their attributes without disclosing their values.

> When received by an entity, a proof of the digital credential needs to be provided and verified, so that only the legitimate controller of the digital credential can take an advantage of its possession. The use of Trusted Applications (TAs) supported by a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) is essential in order to provide a proof of control of a digital credential.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When received by an entity, a proof of the digital credential needs to be provided and verified, so that only the legitimate controller of the digital credential can take an advantage of its possession. The use of Trusted Applications (TAs) supported by a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) may be essential for some use cases in order to provide a proof of control of a digital credential
```
